---
layout: default
title: Radioactive Samples & Measurements
date: 2018-06-29
priority: 0.4
banner: radioactivity
---

{{ page.title }}
=====
---

## Natural background

ToDo

Common background radiation goes from 0.041μSv/h to 0.081μSv/h (3650 - 7200μSv/year).
At my location, Measured to be in average 23 CPM or 0.135 &mu;Sv/h.



## Potassium (K)

Potassium-40 (K-40) is perhaps the most common radioactive nuclide.  Potassium
is widespread in all living beings and is fundamental for cell signaling in
e.g. neurons. Natural potassium is composed by three isotopes: K-39, K-40, and
K-41. The 39 and 41 isotopes are stable and constitute 99.988% of total
potassium. Potassium-40 is 0.0117% and is radioactive with an half-life of
1.252 billion years.  In 98.28% of cases, K-40 decays to calcium-40 by &beta;
emission with a maximum energy of 1.31 MeV and an antineutrino. About 10.72% of
the time it decays to argon-40 by electron capture, with the emission of a
1.460 MeV gamma ray. Both Ca-40 and Ar-40 are stable isotopes. Given the
half-life of 1.252 billion years, the specific activity of potassium-40 is
254.5 KBq/g.  As said, 1 g of natural potassium contains 0.117 mg of K-40, so 1
g of potassium has a specific activity of about 31 Bq.

### Bananas

A famous source of K-40 radioactivity is the banana dose, a curious unit of
measure of the effective dose a human is subjected by eating a banana.
Assuming a banana of 150 g, it contains about 360 mg of potassium per 100
grams.  This totals to about 65 &mu;g of K-40 that, with a specific activity of
264.5 KBq/g (see above), produces an activity of 17 Bq.  Unfortunately, this is
too small and hard to detect.

### Potassium Chloride (KCl)

A more concentrated source of potassium, is potassium chloride (KCl) which can
be bought easily online. I bought a bag of 454 g of KCl (one pound) which is
said to be about 95% pure.  Potassium chloride contains 52.44% of potassium,
which means 26.4 mg of K-40. The activity is much higher than the
banana dose, reaching 7 KBq. This is readily measurable. My SGS tube measures
18 CPM (background already subtracted), which converts to 0.11 &mu;Sv/h. Given
the background is 23 CPM, my pound of potassium chloride causes an almost 2-fold
increase in detected activity.


## Thorium (Th)

Thorium is one of the few radioactive primordial element. It is formed during
the core collapse of very massive stars and dispersed in space by the explosion
of the resulting supernova. No stable isotopes of thorium exist -- all are
radioactive.  Fortunately (?), thorium-232 has a half-life of 14.06 billion
years, which is comparable to the age of the universe (13.8 billion years).
This implies a good quantity of Th-232 can be found in natural rocks and
minerals. Natural thorium is effectively pure Th-232: the second most abundant
isotope is Th-230 (0.02%) and the others are present in traces. Th-230 has a
half-file of 75.400 years and is a byproduct of uranium decay.

Th-232 is the head of the "thorium series" decay chain. The chain follows:
Th-232, Ra-228, Ac-228, Th-228, Ra-224, Rn-220, Po-226, Pb-212, Bi-212. Here
the chain splits: Bi-212 decays 64% of time to Po-212 and 36% of time to
Tl-208. Both decay to Pb-208, which is stable. The chain contains 6 nuclides
that alpha decay, and 4 which beta decay. The longest-lived isotope in the
serie (after Th-232) is Ra-228, which has a half-file of 5.7 years. This
implies that all Th-232 samples older than about 50 years (about 10 times the
Ra-228 half-life) contains all 10 decay products of Th-232 in equilibrium, with
Th-232 slowly decreasing and Pb-212 slowling accumulating. As an interesting
note, a pure sample of Th-232 has a significantly lower radioactivity than a
50-years old sample, due to the missing radioactivity of all daugther isotopes.
Assuming none of the Rn-220 is dispersed (it is a gas), an "equilibrium" sample
would be about 10 times more radioactive than a pure Th-232 sample. Monitoring
the radioactivity of a pure Th-232 sample with time we would observe a steady
increase for the first 50 years or so, and then an essentially constant
activity for millions of years.

### Metallic thorium

Thorium in metallic form has a nice silver color, which blackens when exposed
to air due to the formation of a superficial layer of thorium oxide
(ThO<sub>2</sub>).  I have a small sample of metallic thorium in a small glass
vial. It is a small strip 6 mm long, 3 mm wide, but I have no idea of its
thickness. Assuming a thickness of 0.1 mm, the sample would weight about 20 mg.
According to the seller it should be 98.5-99% pure. Due to the very small mass,
its activity is very low. As of May 2018, my SGS-5 geiger counter measures 7
CPM (background already subtracted), or 0.04 &mu;Sv/h.

### Welding electrodes

Gas Tungsten Arc Welding (GTAW), also known as Tungsten Inert Gas (TIG)
welding, is an arc welding process. The electrodes used for this are, as the
name suggests, made of tungsten, both pure or as an alloy with other metals. Of
interest here, are the thoriated tungsten electrodes, which contain thorium
oxide (thoria, ThO<sub>2</sub>). Three thoriated alloys have been standardized:
WT20 (red tip) contains about 2% of thoria, WT30 (violet tip) contains 3%, and
WT40 (orange tip) contains 4%.

I have 10 red tip (2% thoria) electrodes with a diameter of 1.6 mm and a length
of 15 cm.  Assuming a density for this alloy of about 19 g/cm<sup>3</sup>, each
electrode weights about 5.75 g, of which 0.11 g are of thoria. Thoria contains
about 88% or thorium, so each electrode contains about 0.1 g of thorium.
Summing the content of the 10 electrodes, I should have a total of about 1 g of
thorium.  This makes calculations for the theoretical activity easy, as the
specific activity of Th-232 is 5 kBq/g. As discussed above, this is valid only
if the thorium is "new"; a 10-fold increase in activity in expected during the
first 50 years of aging. As of May 2018, my SGS-5 geiger counter measures 118
CPM (background already subtracted), or 0.69 &mu;Sv/h.

### Gas Mantle

As of May 2018, my SGS-5 geiger counter measures 287 CPM (background already
subtracted), or 1.68 &mu;Sv/h.

### Other sources to explore

 - Minerals, like monazite or thorite.
 - Photographic lens
 - Monazide sand


## Uranium

### Uranium glass
 - About 5/8'' in diameter
 - 3% U-238 by weight
 - U added to glass while molten
 - U gives pale green color to glass. 
 - Glow under UV light (blacklight)
 - Bought from unitednuclear

As of May 2018, my SGS-5 geiger counter measures 13 CPM (background already
subtracted), or 0.08 &mu;Sv/h.

### Fiestaware

 - Small plate with red-orange glaze containing uranium (radioactive red)
 - Not branded

As of May 2018, my SGS-5 geiger counter measures 2011 CPM (background already
subtracted), or 11.75 &mu;Sv/h.

### Uraninite

As of May 2018, my SGS-5 geiger counter measures 3306 CPM (background already
subtracted), or 19.31 &mu;Sv/h.


## Americium-241 

### smoke detector
 - Americium-241   -> AmO2  (0.29 ug)
 - Activity: 1 uCi = 37 kBq
 - Half-Life: 432.2 years
 - Decade: 241Am -> 237Np + alpha(5.486Mev) + gamma(59.5409keV)
 - Neptunium-237 half-life: 2.14 million years -> It accumulates!
 - After 19years -> 3%, after 32years 5%
 - Np237 almost 5000 times less active than Am241
 - Measured activity: 283 CPM or 1.65 &mu;Sv/h

As of May 2018, my SGS-5 geiger counter measures 258 CPM (background already
subtracted), or 1.51 &mu;Sv/h.


## Other possible sources...
 - Tritium vials.
 - Thorite -- mineral containing thorium
 - Brazile nuts -- testing from Brazil/Perù -- No luck up to now...
 - Orange tip thoriated electrodes
 - Radiendocrinator

